pretty well.
You know, the usual suspects are seeming cheerful.
Okay, Nicholson Baker.
This is on, okay.
Yeah, so I mean, I've got someone in charge there, you know, as well as I do, who seems to be a lot closer to what
what the public would want from somebody learning a great library.
It's a very interesting thing to me, though, and it still sticks.
I mean, it's the one quote out of all the people I've talked to.
I said, do you see the role of the San Francisco Public Library as being a research library?
And he said, no.
That's quite a shocking, not shocking, but it is quite a disclosure for me.
I mean, the Boston Public Library is one of the great research libraries.
New York, Cleveland.
Why not San Francisco, especially when there are no other major public, publicly available facilities?
Am I talking a little bit about this?
No, no, not at all.
I remember you saying that, and I was honestly a little puzzled by that, because whether
any administrator likes it or not, the San Francisco Public Library already is a research library.
That's right.
I mean, even if they didn't buy a single book, even if they stopped subscribing to all of their 7,000 plus periodicals, they would always be a research library.
In fact, as the years went on, if they properly cared for their collection, they would become more and more of a research library, because that's the inheritance of the library grows in value as the
if the collection is taken care of.
The only thing I can say is that she maybe wants to avoid the kind of managerial problems that are associated with defining something as a research library, because in that definition, there are these quantitative measures.
You have to have a certain number of books, a certain number of periodical subscriptions, and she wants the flexibility to concentrate.
And there's also a definition of research depth to me.
Right.
That's right.
Had I already interviewed her when I came to see you?
I guess I hadn't seen Dowling.
No, I think we talked on the phone after the thing, and you mentioned that.
I hope it's just a matter of semantics or something and not the fact that her own background, which is of a small
the city library that, while it's a very fine little library, is not a research lecture, the Berkeley Public Library.
I hope that her background isn't kind of asserting itself.
Well, she was interviewed on a Sunday morning a couple of weeks ago, did you see that?
And they were doing a nice, bright, feel-good feature.
on the tool library in Berkeley.
There's a tool that they call a tool, are you aware of this?
Oh yeah, well I've seen other tool libraries.
And the people, the guys who teach you how to work, how to use a saw, they're librarians.
Right.
You know, that's cute, but should library money be spent, I mean I think to me it's diverting money that should be spent for books
What do you mean, coming out of the library, by the way?
It's the library.
It's the Berkeley Public Library that runs this.
And Gina was interviewed because she was the one who was there when it was put in place.
And you know, I went to a thing here at the BPL a couple of weeks ago, which is back that way, observing its 150th anniversary this year, the oldest public library.
And John Berry, the head of Library Journal, was there.
I chatted with him, and I'll be interviewing him later for this book.
You know, when you think about it, I think more than seventy percent of American people may assert that they use a public library in the course of a year, and yet it gets less than one percent of a municipal budget.
What other municipal agencies deliver so much?
to the missionary for such a minuscule portion.
And then you're going to still use that minuscule little portion to go out and buy tools.
Tools and drills.
Yeah.
Well, yeah, no, that does seem strange.
I wonder.
And I've asked.
I can't say that that's the case.
I've asked a few questions.
I'm not going to make a big deal out of it, but it just seems to me that, yeah, fine, do a thing with the tools.
That's great.
But does that then meanwhile, at the same time, at Berkeley have this thing going on over at the university with the
the resources there being dramatically reduced, and that's all.
Oh, yeah, that's gotten worse since, I mean, did you finally get the report that came out from, what's that name, that guy's name, anyway?
Peter Lyman.
No, he resigned, but the guy who was head of the Alumni Journal published it.
Oh, I got that.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I got that.
I mean, there are definitely people fighting that.
very hard, but Rosenblatt, Sue Rosenblatt, is entrenched.
Peter Lyman was the titular head, but Sue Rosenblatt is the one that the... Who is she?
She's some kind of acting library director, assistant director, you know, the kind of person who is going to be there, and she is in... And like Gina Hover, she's not really appointed as the...
Oh, that might be the... Yeah.
Well, we will get to the new book presently.
And that will, by the way, be the lead.
I'm going to just keep this here so I can see the number, so I can cue.
You want to put it over here?
Yeah, just so I can see the number.
I've got some space here.
This is good.
Just so if there's a number, I want to cue.
That also helps when you're transcribing, by the way.
It goes straight to the number.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
But I just wanted to say this, no thanks, maybe a little bit later.
I just wanted to say that about, you know, I don't, I've never talked to Gina Manufri, so I don't know if she's, if she's, if she's, but she's clearly a lot closer.
I mean, she's within the ballpark.
All administrators are going to have blind spots, and they're not going to understand things the way the real, you know,
The true lover of a certain profession wants them to understand things, but she's obviously closer.
Sue Rosenblatt, on the other hand, from what I understand, and I don't want to get too personal, is a person who is closer to the Dowland staff.
a person who deals entirely in questions of funding and cutting and, you know, how can we reduce staff and how can we get as many books off the shelves and into remote storage?
You know, how do we cut down circulation?
I mean, the real incentive to get books off the shelves, that seems to me interesting.
I mean, you build a new building and then, in the case of Berkeley, you get the shelves
half-empty in many cases, because it's in the library's interest, if they're looking at it this way, to have as many books unbrowsable as possible.
You know, if they're remotely stored, then they're not going to circulate as much.
It's a labor-intensive business.
They're not going to be discovered, either.
They're not going to be found, and they're not going to be taken out, and that means they don't have to be reshelled.
There's no wear and tear.
They just sit there, and the fact that they don't circulate
becomes just a self-fulfilling process.
I'll start a chapter in the new book, and this is written already with Ken Carpenter over at Harvard, and he's a wonderful librarian.
I spent a morning with him going through Widener with a trolley, going through the process of picking books for remote storage.
What criteria are we using?
How are you deciding?
I mean, I was even responsible for picking a couple of books.
He said, you know, we discussed how we do it, and a little duplicates of, you know, 1920s fiction that nobody reads, what do you need four copies of this book for here?
But he said, you know, it dawned on him at one point that I am really influencing
scholarly inquiry.
And he takes this so seriously.
And he said, and I also realized that in some cases I was reinforcing the canon.
Now, he said, I believe in the canon, but do we need to have 40 volumes of Shakespeare here?
He was going to encyclopedias and references to make sure that the standards were there.
He said, but in some instances he was sending off books that nobody was calling for at all.
At the same time, he had a daughter who was doing research and a Ph.D.
at Harvard on 18th century female French writers.
He said, if I had sent those books off, she would never have, because every serendipity, the serendipity of browsing, that's what you're talking about right here.
Right.
the elimination of the card catalog takes away, the elimination of the stacks to go in.
I mean, I always find more exciting things next to the book I'm looking for that are much more useful to me than the book I go in to find.
I'm sure you've discovered that.
And so he wants to retain that kind of a... Within the limits of the fact that you can't put everything on the shelf.
That you can't keep all 20 million books that I would owe.
It's not 40 million, but that's what the facility is.
So we did that for a morning, and that was kind of fun.
And then I went out to the center, which is out in Southville, which is right next to where they keep the chimpanzees for the monkeys for the medical school.
That was kind of funny.
You know, like, you've got this site.
But they're going to have 20 million books.
At least they're keeping the books.
Right.
That's the thing.
Yeah.
And it's a 24-hour turnaround, by the way.
I requested a book, and it was there the next morning.
And then Berkeley has a very good system like that, too.
in that they seem to be very careful about not withdrawing to gifts anything that's not absolutely, that's a duplicate.
I mean, they have all these tags sticking up out of all the books, but I checked them, and the books seem, in large part, to be duplicates.
But they are dismantling Moffat.
But all the libraries are... Remote storage is the way to go.
collections have always grown.
They're going to continue to grow.
And what seems to have happened is that the computer industry sold library managers on the idea that libraries wouldn't have to grow physically.
I think library managers would never say that.
In the back of their mind was this hope that the idea of a permanently increasing physical collection was a hope that that permanent increasing collection was going to stop increasing, that they would get control over it somehow.
Well, I didn't say it right.
I mean, I think in the back of library managers' minds that the software industry was able to convince library managers somehow that they would be able to stop this age-old
process of a gradually age-old, you know, when I try to provide a quote, I always get it.
Don't worry about it.
That's fine.
Clean it up, will you?
Make it work.
Don't worry about that.
I like the idea, and it's not even a direct quote I'm looking for, but the idea of getting control over the numbers is ... Yeah, yeah.
I mean, the strange thing is, at the same time, they want to get control over the numbers,
of the physical, the book collection, and keep it steady, in a steady state, rather than, you know, the expanding universe.
They really want to change the idea of the universe of books.
At the same time, they want to build a new building because they're still in the real estate business.
They're still excited by the idea of big buildings.
So they build a big building.
And they're being built everywhere, by the way.
Right.
So they build the new building, but the actual book storage part
Part of the idea of building the big building was that this is the final... No, this is not the big solution.
This is the... This is going to finally get the problem under control.
We're going to have more and more of the books that are on the shelf are going to go into digital storage, and therefore there's going to be a kind of one-for-one
trade of new books for old books.
Have you followed this controversy lately with the
ensuring the longevity of digital material, you know, the fact that this stuff doesn't even last ten years?
Yeah, you know, Scientific American did a big thing on that, and now the New York Times, and then I just saw it more recently somewhere like Business Week or something.
Yeah, U.S.
News did it.
U.S.
News, yeah.
I mean, this is something that, you know, I knew this from back in the eighties, because I,
I was—my big strength as a temp was on the Wang system.
Well, the Wang software is not TOS.
It wasn't.
And it was—and all the skills that were involved in being a good Wang word processor are not transferable except for the ASCII keyboard.
In addition, they used huge—they weren't five-and-a-quarter-inch diskettes.
They were, I don't know, nine-inch diskettes.
And there were
millions of those diskettes in law firms all over the city.
That was around here, right?
Yeah, I worked here, yeah.
As a temp for whom now?
Dozens and dozens of them.
So you were a computer guy?
Office specialists, yeah.
And I wrote, you know, Wang macros to put footnotes in things.
You know, I felt I knew what I was doing with that.
And this was maybe 83, right?
Well, then I would go into
offices that were all in the throes of conversion problems in 83, 84, 85.
They would be converting from the old deck machines, or there were linear.
Oh, these things are forgotten.
They're impossible to access them.
Right.
And the conversion programs were—you would lose things in the conversion—so I'd already gone through this whole process once.
And then at the same time I bought a K-Pro, a K-Pro 2X, which was, you know,
a kind of nice portable computer, but it was CPM.
So from 1985 through 1993, all my computer files were written in CPM.
So I then had to go, and I still have my CPM computer.
It's still bootable, but those disks, as soon as that computer stops working, those disks will be unreadable.
So naturally I've had to convert.
I've had to get conversion programs, convert it to DOS, then convert it to...
to the version of AmiPro I was running and then converted from AmiPro to a later version of AmiPro to work.
So the whole migration path stuff is stuff that I've been seeing for over a decade now.
All of the interviews I did for General Madness are on.
The transcriptions are on these five and a half inch.
Of course, I still got the old computer.
It's struggling.
It's wheezing.
It's coughing along.
But I'm not getting rid of it.
It accepts these disks.
And so I haven't had the time, and I should finally just copy them over, and I'll be doing that.
But it's even worse than that, like the tapes of the Voyager, the magnetic tapes of the Voyager missions.
Right, right.
No, I know, the fact that I might have lost data and stuff with my own little, I actually have, I can now search on my little compact computer there, I can search all of my written files from
all my computer files, not my Olivetti portable typewriter files, but my computer files since 1985.
So I haven't lost anything.
And the loss isn't for somebody like me.
It's for all of the Weather Service and all these vast agencies who manage huge databases and stuff is lost.
I didn't mean to get into this, but I was at the, you know, for this book.
But I went to, it started breaking.
I just made contact with Jeff Rothenberg, and we have a computer conversation going, and we're going to talk this week.
But I went out to this new Archives II building in Maryland, you know, which is the second only in size to the Pentagon.
It is something to see.
Five billion pieces of paper in here, you know, and yet how much the percentage of government business is going to be like 70 percent electronic.
and they're not keeping all of it, you know?
You see that order, that edict thing, you're supposed to get rid of all the email when you... That's why I went out there.
I mean I do follow up on these stories immediately.
So I hate to go off on that track here.
No, the whole thing, the whole, I mean that's what got me involved in the cart catalog in the first place, was that
I just want to see where we are on the tape.
Yeah, yeah.
Here we had the equivalent of a backup, a snapshot of what had been the state-of-the-art software of its time.
And you didn't need to get new hardware or fiddle around with
you know, compatibility problems in order for it to be legible.
It was permanently legible.
And so it seems the perfect kind of thing that you'd want to save if you want to have, because all those other handwritten online catalogs that are now being phased out as they get in and back and everything, those, there's no way necessarily to freeze what was in all those libraries as of a given date.
I'll show you in my bag here.
I'm going up to the Athenaeum to get some books.
I usually do my search on the Hollis, the Harvard at home, and then I go up to the Athenaeum because it's cheaper.
They have 98 percent of what I'm looking for.
But I do my searching.
Well, I've been looking for Hernando Columbus's history
biography of his father, because I did the Columbus Library in Seville.
It's a beautiful little story.
It's in my next marriage, a bibliothese.
It's in the end of the book.
But I want to read this biography of his father in English.
I searched Harvard, and you'll see here, it's got 2,000 items on Columbus.
I went through every friggin' one of them, and it doesn't have it.
So then I'm going through another guy's new book on Columbus, and he references a book edited by a guy named Dean.
Yeah, I've got it here.
So now I go back to Hollis and I search for Dean.
Within a year or without?
No, whatever it is.
It doesn't matter.
He never showed up in Columbus.
Now it shows up.
There it is.
Totally different.
The title is Fernando Columbus's History of His Father.
It did not show up in the Columbus space, but it showed up when I did a search of Dean.
Now I've got the book.
It's there, but if I believe that stupid...
The first thing I searched, it wasn't there.
I mean, you have to learn the tricks of alternative maneuverings around the—I'll show it to you in a second.
That's a perfect example.
I mean, what actually you're losing—it's not a question of one antiquated paper-based system versus the electronic system.
It's that the electronic system, for defensible reasons, removes
the human judgment from the act of finding the links between books, and substitutes them with alphabetically based ones.
And so that, you know, somebody who had been thinking about those cards would have obviously thought, well, we've got to have a card in Columbia.
I would have gone straight to Hernando.
See, I was going for the son.
Or he was also known as Ferdinand.
So anyway, I went to Ferdinand, I went to Fernando, I went to Hernando.
I mean, all these different names that he's known by.
was popping it up.
I'll show it to you when we're done, but I found it.
It took me an hour of just screwing around just last night to do it.
On the other hand, the great thing is that you talk about serendipity with cards is nice and serendipity with browsing is nice.
There's also, of course,
There's online serendipity and electronics.
It's just that those serendipitous moments are entirely different.
They give you a different universe.
I'll give you a perfect example.
I'm going to write a story about it.
Maybe for the globe or somebody in Philly might want to take it.
For the duration of this research, I bought a LexisNexis
Well, that's not bad.
It's not bad.
It's a personal one.
It's called a requester.
I don't get access to the law, the legal.
I don't need them.
But I was lazy one day, and I was trying to find, I mean, I got all my books upstairs, and I wanted to get some background on just some factual stuff on the Rosetta Stone.
Right.
So I searched Rosetta Stone.
I get a hundred stories.
Not one of them has anything to do with the Rosetta Stone.
this is the Rosetta Stone of gastrointestinal research.
This is the Rosetta Stone of baseball."
And I said, I had no idea how profoundly this phrase has entered the language, and nobody ever tells you what the Rosetta Stone is.
And I copied them all.
I saved them all to disk, and they're funny, you know?
This is the Rosetta Stone.
She has written what will be the Rosetta Stone of Mexican cooking.
I mean, I can't remember, but they're hilarious.
Some of the quotes
But the computer did exactly what I asked it to look for.
Looked for a Rosetta Stone.
Right.
So you've got a wonderful rear diagonal cut through culture without actually learning about it.
And it cuts across sports, business.
That's the amazing thing.
That phrase is used in all segments.
It was in Business Week.
It was in Sports Illustrated.
It was in Popular Mechanics, you know, because Lex Next gives you all that.
And I determined I will never use the phrase Rosetta Stone again in my own writing, because I had no idea that it would become such a cliche.
Maybe I will.
That's the scary thing about those quick searches, is that you get tired of something so fast.
But this is over a period of my years, you know.
But you can look forward to the kind of Rosetta Stones that we'll need, or we,
cryptographers in the future will need in order to figure out—you know, they've got a CPM version of a document and— This was the context that I was using it in.
Yeah, and they'll have to then compare, find the—and I mean, people will get quite better at
decoding this stuff.
But the interesting thing was that, was it Rothenberg?
Jeff Rothenberg, yeah.
Yeah, the interesting thing was his worried, you don't know where things start and stop in the data stream.
Do you have that story?
I'd be happy to send it to you.
Yeah, I got that one.
Because it's a tough one to find.
It's scientific.
Yeah, because I subscribe to a scientific American, yeah.
I finally got it.
Plus he updated it, and he told me how to get it on a PDF.
I have to read it.
He updated the story, the article, but it's not published anywhere.
It's only available at a site.
I'll be happy... T.S.P.
Yeah, I have to get a Dolby reader to read it.
The acrobat thing?
Yeah.
But I'll be happy to send you an e-mail.
You can probably access the story if you'd like.
What's your e-mail address?
I'll send it to you.
Hey, you know what?
I'm clean.
I'm clean and sober.
You are?
I'm off.
I'm unplugged.
I mean, I have an account.
I've had the same account that I've had since 1993, but it was such a joy when I was in England
not to have to check that damn mailbox every day.
Really?
And lose the time answering.
So I have not, you know, I used to read The Well, too, which is a place where writers go and, you know, journalists and stuff.
But now the only time I use the net is if I'm doing some research
I look up something using a search engine and stuff, but I don't do any email.
It's not good.
It's just a personal decision.
I love it because I don't have to add to a lot of telephone.
You can do a lot of stuff quite expeditiously.
Yeah, I just got the feeling sometimes when I would be setting up a lunch date with somebody, and there would be four emails going back and forth, and if you added up the minutes spent, I'd spend 45 minutes setting up this
lunch date, practically as much time as I would have spent having lunch with the person, doing these things.
And it wasn't fun.
I mean, I think if it's fun, and if it's a joy to link up to all the people, it's one thing, but, you know, I've got a family, I've got a, you know, I like reading, actually.
I mean, and I find that reading much more as a result of not... I like reading, actually.
Let's move over briefly to the Lewinsky thing, and then we'll talk about the new book.
Okay.
Yeah.
But it seems to me controversy catches up with you, even when you're not doing anything.
I mean, minding your own business.
It's bizarre, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, the New Yorker piece is fine.
You took affirmative steps.
You wrote some stories.
Right.
came, you know, I mean, you're culpable there.
I mean, you know, you knew it was coming, and that's to be expected.
That's right.
Here, this is a book you wrote in 1992 or whatever it is, or 93.
And here we are six years later, and you're drawn into the Lewinsky-Clinton imbroglio.
Well, I mean, what a delightful thing to be part of a major news story.
I mean, I've
I never imagined—I mean, I guess the idea is that—the first thing to say is that there's no confirmation of this.
That Star—the Star's team, they're adept at leaking things, but then when things don't turn out very well, they stop leaking things.
And there's no—you know, nobody seems to be having—there's no second source for this.
In fact, I can't even find out where the original leak came from.
That's the insidious nature of these leaks, though, in Sol's stories.
We never find out.
Right.
And you don't know the motive for the leak.
Is the motive for the leak to demonstrate that there's some relevancy to the idea of harassing a bookstore for its records because it has to do with the—or is it just simply to demonstrate that Lewinsky's a kind of loose woman, therefore she's the kind of woman who would read a book like Vox, and therefore
you know, look at her?
I mean, is it that kind of thing?
Well, no, I think it's to suggest that some people were saying, you know, this Linda Tripp thing, apparently, was that she engaged in phone sex.
She tells Tripp, with Clinton.
Now, you're looking for ways, independent ways, external ways, to prove that maybe this happened.
Right.
Maybe she bought this book and gave it to him.
Well, and the idea is he admitted to getting books.
So the thrilling idea would be that she, I mean thrilling from one point of view, thrilling to me as just kind of an amused bystander.
It's delightful to think that Lewinsky gave Clinton
my own book, this book that came out of my head, that, you know, just bought a paperback and gave it to him, and then it was traveling around in Air Force One, you know, whatever was happening.
That's a delightful fantasy.
But it seems, if you shift your perspective slightly, it's appalling that the legal system is being employed
to squeeze that kind of information, private information, out of a bookstore.
Lewinsky had absolutely no interest in revealing it.
I just think it's an abuse of good faith and legal tact and anything that we think of as important in
maintaining.
Part of the way of nourishing the legal system is that you don't use this kind of, you know, 80-pound sledgehammer to get at a fact that's simply an interesting, gossipy corroboration, you know?
Yeah, but even beyond that, I mean, the scarier issue is, I mean, people's reading habits.
Does a guy on a fishing expedition have the right to go and try and determine?
I mean, what bothers me about computerized borrowing cards from libraries is that there's now a computerized record of every book that you've borrowed from the library.
And I know when I was a book reviewer, I spent thirteen years.
This is hot.
No, I actually like your quote, thank you.
I used to feel that I was really privy to really confidential information, what people liked to read, things they were particularly passionate about reading.
And I consider that almost like being a confessor, you know what I mean?
And all of a sudden, I don't know, I have to check the McCarthy years, but did McCarthy try and go after people's reading stuff, do you know?
I don't know, but the unfortunate thing is that this practice, more recently, was pioneered by the other side.
Bork's video rental records were made public.
Remember when the Bork, the Judge Bork, what they did was, they didn't want Bork in there.
So they got the, well, you know, I mean, you can definitely
disagree with somebody on his principles.
But what they did is exposed his videotape rental records, because there were embarrassing things in there, I guess.
I don't actually know.
Are they pornotapes then?
I don't know.
Because I think that the group kind of exposed it, but the press hadn't sunk quite to the level that they're at now.
And so they weren't going to say, you know, that he was publishing Three Girls and a Dog or whatever it was that he was renting.
I don't know.
I don't know if it was that.
I don't even know.
I corroborate everything independently.
Right.
But to say, you know, Packwood's diaries, I mean— Well, that's different, though.
That's not reading.
That's just diaries.
Yeah, you're right.
That's different.
That's a different thing.
But as far as the record of the consumption of these symbolic things, videos or books, it was pioneered by the left.
That's the sad fact.
I mean, in recent memory.
I don't know about McCarthy.
Well, I'm going to go back and check McCarthy, because there was a statement that, you know, the freedom to read, which I'm told came out in the 1950s out of the Des Moines Public Library of all places.
The Midwest is a very interesting area of book culture, which I'm going to write about in this new book.
And apparently it was inspired by the McCarthy stuff.
I mean, it just seems like the kind of thing he would do.
I mean, to smear somebody as a truce or that you read, you know.
Right.
played by Arthur Miller or something like that.
You read that, you know, Arthur Miller or, you know, anyone who might have had leftist tendencies, you could smear them.
My feeling also, on the other hand, is if you're making a case against the Unabomber, Ted Kaczynski, now this guy's been charged with mass murder, or Timothy McVeigh charged with mass murder, their reading came into these matters as well.
I love that lead.
There was a New York Times piece.
that Starr came under attack for having subpoenaed the Cramer Books records, and Barnes & Noble, I think, by that time.
And so the team defended themselves, saying, well, McVeigh, you know, the Unabomber stuff was subpoenaed, and McVeigh's stuff was subpoenaed, so of course we have the right to subpoena Lewinsky.
But the point is that Lewinsky actually— He's charged with nothing.
You know, the worst that she's done is just have an affair with the president, for crying out loud.
Well, not only that, she's not charged with a crime.
Yes.
There's no crime.
No allegations.
No stuff going around, but she doesn't stand accused legally of anything.
Right, right, right.
So the other strange irony, well, the other irony for me is that one of the things that interested me in writing the book, Fox, was that these two characters, who never saw each other, were able to maintain some
a strange quality of privacy.
Their lives weren't touching.
You know, they were on the phone and they were telling stories to each other and having this interesting intimacy.
Very good point.
But they were, neither of them really knew what the other was reading or what each other's apartments looked like or anything about it.
So the book was about
different kinds of privacy and what things do you allow yourself to reveal and what things do you hold back at different points in a conversation and things.
So the idea that this book now would be kind of used as a fulcrum to unearth private things that Lewinsky never would have told the world is kind of sad.
But I understand, I read someplace that they actually, Random House went out and printed another edition, did another printing of rocks, is that right?
Yeah, I guess they, I mean, from the point of view, I don't see any of the, I think vintage, well, I mean, any writer's happy when, I mean, I'm delighted when any human being buys my book.
Right, you know, but I don't actually see any of the money because of the way these advances have to be paid back.
I'm not talking about the money.
But the printing, the idea that suddenly a book will be in play, I felt it was of its time, and that in some ways I feel that it was maybe partly responsible for a kind of flowering of graphic smirkiness that I don't
even want, you know, that I was part of the early phase of something that's gotten out of hand, you know, or something.
And then, of course, I wrote the Fermata, which is, it's far, far worse in a way, as far as, you know, smirky pornography.
So what can you do?
So let's move from that and the Fermata.
Were these phases in your, now we're moving to the new book, were these phases, were these part of the arc of your
Yeah, I guess it doesn't, it doesn't, the career doesn't seem to have an arc-like shape.
There's no, I mean, it seems to be a more of a, um, it feels more as if I'm, I've got a large level plane with a lot of different colored boxes on it.
and each one being a subject matter or something that I'm interested in.
And I kind of do my best to describe one of these pieces of reality and then move on to the next one.
So I feel as if I'm just sort of taking these little diagonal jaunts and trying to cover all the bases or get my croquet ball through all the wickets, rather than that there's some
some shape, and there'll be a keystone, and then there'll be a long, gradual decline.
There'll be a lot of aimless wandering.
I just did an interview with Mary Gordon and her new book, which is interesting.
I don't know if you know Mary, but this is really, she's just written, what is for her, a naughty book.
I don't know if you're familiar with it.
It's fun.
It's an erotic comedy.
And I said to her, Mary, you know, we've done four interviews over the years, and you had told me earlier, you know, she's very uncomfortable writing about male sexuality and empathizing, blah, blah, blah.
And I said, what happened?
She said, well, I had a son.
You know, all of a sudden, you know, I've come to that.
I, number one, understand children.
I understand males.
And I love my son, and I feel I understand.
And now I've had to bring myself to the realization that
that all men aren't from outer space.
They aren't the other.
That's a long way of getting into, I wonder, especially in view of the dedication of this new novel, if being a dad, having a daughter, having children in some way, this is a book that I think could not have been written by Nicholson Baker prior to being a father.
No, no.
Maybe that's whack.
Oh, there's no question.
Actually, none of the books.
Swinging at curveballs, I don't know.
But actually, I did start writing
until after I'd had a child, so I've always written.
But you're quite right that the book is almost entirely based on the experiences that my own daughter had going to school in England.
And there's no reason for, I mean, it's just, it's essentially, it's a really kind of primitive act of fatherly pride.
That's great.
I'm saying, well, here's this person, and nobody else has written about her, so I'm going to.
It's my job to do that.
I happen to know this human being better than anyone else.
On the other hand, I did take liberties with... I mean, I didn't... It's a novel.
It's a novel.
Yeah, there's enough of my own invention and filtering and sorting
and the kind of cleaning up of the chronology, because you just can't transplant.
But on the other hand, I benefited hugely from the fact that even when I was making something up, I could go out of my office, if it were Saturday or Sunday, and say, Alice, how would you tell this story?
Really?
Can you give me an example of this?
And how it got into the book?
Let's see.
I should back up.
The main way that the book took shape was that I had a certain fund of knowledge about what this kid was like.
But that didn't help me very much.
What I had really was... Do you mind if I shoot a couple of pictures of you while you're talking, by the way?
No, not at all.
Okay, good.
I like the hand gestures.
What I had were these interviews that I did of her after I'd pick her up at school.
I'd take her out to a place we would have tea near this cathedral.
What was the cathedral, by the way?
Oh, it was the Ely Cathedral, E-L-Y, Ely, England.
and uh we'd go out and do you mind if i do the uh glasses off for you whatever you like um anyway so we would get we would uh we would meet after these things about almost about two or three times a week i guess and i would just ask what ha what what happened that day
And when she would answer, she just told it in her own words.
And it was fascinating.
So the next day, I would write a scene.
And that's how the book mostly took shape.
But then in the cleaning up, well, then I would get interested in certain stories and things.
And then I would, sometimes I would tell her a story.
I don't want to give an exact.
We're here.
We'll be here.
Sometimes I would tell her.
I actually want to keep it a mystery which stories in the book are my own and which stories are hers.
Okay, that's great.
Because... Yeah.
There's a nice...
So I would tell her a story.
You don't?
Yeah, I would tell her a story.
And she has, I think, a much better memory for narrative than I do.
I don't know if it's because when you're a kid you've heard fewer stories, or if it's just because she's better.
I think it's just because she's better at this.
So then a couple weeks later I'd ask her to tell me the story that I'd told her.
And inevitably she told it better than I did.
And so in some cases my own story is filtered through her own sensibility.
And this is while you were in England?
So it was written on the spot, yeah.
The book was written.
When she was in school in England, the book was written in that first term in England.
So what was the motivation for it?
Well, I don't know.
I just felt that, oh, well, the motivation was that I could see that this
this kid, that this kid I love so much, was changing every year.
You know, she was, she, certain ways that she used to speak, certain phrases that she used to use were disappearing, especially the language, but also the, you know,
You know, she was understanding things a little better.
And I felt a little panicky about having, about the prospect of losing some of the ways that she'd understood the world and felt that, you know, I had a real deadline, that if I didn't write the book then, that a whole fund of things, that I would forget certain things that were true of her.
And the only way really to keep this
this particular person, to keep a memory of her the way she was at a certain time, was to write a novel about her.
Why didn't you do it in her voice?
Because I'm not very keen about books that are written in the first person and kids' voices, because I've never known a kid
who can write a novel.
One of the things that the heroine in my story does is write stories, and she has ambitions to write long things, books and everything, but they always end to be continued.
Because the salient thing about being a kid is that you're not going to write 200 pages.
You're going to write seven pages and then be excited about the grand plan that never comes to fruition.
So it has to be somewhere in that middle space between a third person and a first person, because it has to have a grown-up stick-to-itiveness that would result in a finished book.
Also, I don't think it's just too easy to have.
I mean, children don't even think in
chapters in novels.
So it has to be third person, I think.
Anyway, go ahead.
No, that's an excellent answer.
You know, it's said that if J.D.
Salinger were to write Catcher in the Rye today, it would be classified as a young adult novel.
I mean, this is one of the risks you take in having your sensual character, your protagonist, being an adolescent.
Were you mindful of any kind of, I hesitate to use the word risk, but I mean,
Yeah, I'm talking about the business of writing now, not about the perception of the novel itself.
The fact that you are writing this from the viewpoint of a child.
Well, yeah, the other thing that I am always suspicious of is when the way that a writer attempts to prove that his book about a child is really for adults is that he uses the child's
point of view to illuminate some dark truth about parental reality or about political upheaval or something like that.
In other words, there's a deep, unhappy, unsettling thing in the middle of this book.
Therefore, it's for adults.
That also just seems false to me.
It's too easy.
If you do it right, if you can
really do justice to the way a kid thinks.
It's not that you're going to get a way of thinking that's superior to grown-up thinking, but you're going to get a particular completeness of understanding and misunderstanding that is intrinsically fascinating and worth studying just as a kind of case study of moral development.
I mean, that's really what was
was part of what I liked was all the, in addition to the verbal oddities and in some cases I thought felicities, at the childish texture of the book there was this fierceness on the part of the heroine
to defend another girl who was persecuted.
Obviously, there are many worse things that happen in the world.
This is a very tame complication, but I've never been able to... I don't know anything about the really bad things, you know, airplane disasters,
divorces or things like that, or massacres.
I mean, the scale that a child lives on is a scale in which if somebody is being bullied, that's a disaster.
And I think it is a disaster.
I mean, I think we are very lucky to live in a culture in which
an Anglo-American culture in which if a kid is made to cry because other kids in the school are kicking her, that's a very bad thing.
I mean, I think we're fortunate there, but the scale doesn't matter in the sense I'm saying.
If you can successfully scoop up some of the moral
dimension of childhood and how a child has to sift through the claims of other children and what her parents think are right and all the stories that she has is kind of moving around in her head of how other people have acted.
Then she has to make up her own stories, all of which have these strange—well, they're not strange, I think they're very typical.
acts of helping little girls you know i mean she's got the burning rain she's lost in the sahara desert and once she finds a little girl who's even more burned than she is you know has to scoop her up and and and you know that their their clothes get torn on a cactus you know but the the little girl this is what's interesting this actually the burning rain is a very
It's almost straight from Alice.
It was dictated by her.
I typed it out.
All I did was add a little punctuation.
She said, I'm really afraid of forgetting this story.
She said to you?
Yeah.
She said, I'm telling a lot of stories about this girl.
When was this?
This was in England?
This was just before we left for England.
Just before you left?
Yeah.
She said, I'm really afraid.
I'm telling all these stories about Mariana, this girl in Mariana.
This could be my lead, by the way.
I always like to know my lead when I leave.
And the way I might kick her, too.
So I think I got both.
Go ahead.
So she said, I'm going to forget it.
I don't know how to do it.
I can't write it down because it's too long.
I'm going to forget it next.
How old was she at this point?
Um, she was, uh, I guess she was, um, she just had her eighth birthday, I guess.
I mean, yeah, she was just having her ninth birthday, I'm sorry, I think.
Actually, I can't, I'd have to check that.
Okay, but how old is she now?
She's now ten.
She was nine in England.
So that's just about eight or nine.
Yeah, yeah.
And so we were driving around when she said this,
And so I just pulled out my computer, and I think my son was asleep in the back, and we were just doing errands.
And so I just typed it out as she dictated the story.
So you stopped the card?
Stopped the card, typed it out, and I think she felt very relieved, you know, that I had... That you'd recorded it?
Recorded it.
And I know she's pleased.
That's one of the things she's read in the book.
She hasn't read the book from cover to cover, but she's very pleased that some of her stories are in there, more or less, that she told them.
Did you discuss with her while this was in process that you're using her?
Yeah, because I wouldn't have used... That's an important question.
Yeah, I asked her... You need her permission, I think.
Absolutely.
I need her to have credit, too.
It's strange because the story would never have been written down if I didn't have some urge to write it down, you know.
But it's entirely from her head.
And so the book is really more a collaboration than any, well certainly more, it's definitely a collaboration.
I mean it's not, it's almost as if I'm a ghostwriter, you know.
I was thinking, although I add my own, sometimes my own autobiographical pet peeves and my feelings about certain things intrude from time to time in my own stories.
But I only wrote stories that after I'd really gotten into her voice, I went back and wrote some stories that were the way I think she would have told the story.
But even then I wanted to be sure, and so she would tell the story back to me, and then sometimes I would incorporate a particular way that she told it rather than I felt like one of those guys like Prop, you know, who did the metamorphosis of folktales or something.
In a strange way, I felt like an anthropologist or something rather than a novelist that's quite as much, although I wanted to have this kind of
complicated, realistic texture that only a novel can have, you know.
I haven't really questioned you about the novel itself.
I try not to do that with novels.
I read them and it's my business to, you know, if it seems like we're not discussing the novel.
We are discussing it.
But I mean in terms of the actual
Right, right.
Well, I mean, you seem to know what it's about.
It's about a nine-year-old person.
It doesn't bother me in life.
As long as you understand how I, you know, I have a responsibility here to read it.
I did two interviews in Denver, both of which were with people who had not read the novel at all.
I mean, they looked at the cover.
They were honest about it.
And that actually can work okay, too.
Well, if they're honest about it.
Yeah.
If they don't pretend to— Because then it becomes the kind of conversation you'd have at a party or something, where the person says, what do you do?
And you say, oh, well, what's it about?
What's it about?
Don't you love that?
Yeah.
Richard Ford answers, it's about 432 pages.
I don't mind at all.
I mean, I like this—they get a kind of weird look, but I say, well, what kind of books do you write?
And I say, well, the first one was about this guy who went out to buy his shoelaces on his lunch hour.
So I was going to kind of look around and, oh, interesting, thinking, well, it's fine.
I get involved when I was writing General Madness.
I said, this is Miami.
I was at the book fair down there last year.
My old pal Bill Robinson from the Miami Herald was out there.
We used to hang out and drink, you know, in New York.
My friend Bill Robinson here, he'd say, what's your book about?
I said, well, it's about book collectors.
And I said, and Bill was as guilty as the next guy.
I said, I get this blank, vacant look.
And then he came up to me after and he says, Nick, he says, the reason you get the plane for it is we were both drunk.
He says, it wasn't because I wasn't comprehending what the book was about because I think we were drunk.
He says, when you told me.
Funny story.
But I mean people say, what's this book about?
And I say, well, it's about book culture, you know, it's about libraries.
Well that's kind of interesting, you know, they say.
Well that's a good way to say it.
It's not a millennial thing, but it is.
I'm not going to have millennium in the subtitle.
That's the kiss of death, I think.
I've changed the title three times.
That's a very good question.
Penelope Fitzgerald, she said she can't start writing, and she's strictly a pen and ink writer.
And she said, I can't write until I have the first paragraph and the last paragraph and the title.
She said, they always change my titles.
But for me, I have to have all of these things.
And then I said, well, gee, that's really quite an acknowledgment because you've written nine novels and only one has what could be described as a happy ending.
And she said, well, I take my cues from life.
But I guess yourself, do you kind of know the arc of the novel?
Well, more so in the case of the earlier books, because I knew, say, with the mezzanine,
I had all this stuff saved up that I'd been harboring for years that I wanted to put in one book.
But with The Everlasting Story of Nori, I had no idea how the book was going to turn out because I was writing it day to day based on reports I was getting from the field.
That's great.
So I didn't know if it was going to have a happy ending or not.
So this was quite literally a work in progress, wasn't it?
Yeah, and I was hoping that things would end all right.
And I mean, I had to make a few adjustments based on the fact that the characters don't exactly correspond to characters in real life.
But I was kind of crossing my fingers that life would turn out all right, so that my book would have some kind of an ending.
And I loved that feeling of, you know, skateboarding almost, through the giving, working, winding my way around whatever obstructions and park benches would come in my way.
You know, the feeling that you're feeling your way through something without knowing what's going to be next.
Did you have your title?
Well, the title, the title is also the riskiest title, I think, because
Because the everlasting story of Nori is just a strange-sounding thing.
But it's true, I think, to a nine-year-old mind.
The words like everlasting and forevermore and never-ending have a kind of power over this girl in the book.
And she very much wants her heroines to have these lives, these heroic lives, and all these adventures.
But of course she herself is having a fairly unadventurous life, going to school, studying, learning about classics, you know.
So there's that part of the title.
But the part that appealed to me maybe was the kind of sadness in it that every parent feels, that they love the self that their child is going to develop into, even in advance.
I mean, I love the nine-year-old self that has annihilated the four-year-old self in my life.
daughter.
But all these series of cells that is a person developing are fleeting.
They are very short-lived.